27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Rest and Motion : Kinematics 53

A healthy youngman standing at a distance of 7 m from
a 11°8 m high building sees a kid slipping from the top
floor. With what speed (assumed uniform) should he run
to catch the kid at the arms height (1°8 m) ?

An NCC parade is going at a uniform speed of 6 km/h
through a place under a berry tree on which a bird is
sitting at a height of 12:1 m. At a particular instant the
bird drops a berry. Which cadet (give the distance from
the tree at the instant) will receive the berry on his
uniform ?

A ball is dropped from a height. If it takes 0°200 s to
cross the last 6°00 m before hitting the ground, find the
height from which it was dropped. Take g = 10 m/s’.

A ball is dropped from a height of 5 m onto a sandy floor
and penetrates the sand up to 10cm before coming to
rest. Find the retardation of the ball in sand assuming
it to be uniform.

An elevator is descending with uniform acceleration. To
measure the acceleration, a person in the elevator drops
a coin at the moment the elevator starts. The coin is 6
ft above the floor of the elevator at the time it is dropped.
The person observes that the coin strikes the floor in 1
second. Calculate from these data the acceleration of the
elevator.

A ball is thrown horizontally from a point 100 m above
the ground with a speed of 20 m/s. Find (a) the time it
takes to reach the ground, (b) the horizontal distance it
travels before reaching the ground, (c) the velocity
(direction and magnitude) with which it strikes the
ground.

A ball is thrown at a speed of 40 m/s at an angle of 60°
with the horizontal. Find (a) the maximum height
reached and (b) the range of the ball. Take g = 10 m/s’.

In a soccer practice session the football is kept at the
centre of the field 40 yards from the 10 ft high goalposts.
A goal is attempted by kicking the football at a speed
of 64 ft/s at an angle of 45° to the horizontal. Will the
ball reach the goal post ?

A popular game in Indian villages is goli which is played
with small glass balls called golis. The goli of one player
is situated at a distance of 2°0m from the goli of the
second player. This second player has to project his goli
by keeping the thumb of the left hand at the place of
his goli, holding the goli between his two middle fingers
and making the throw. If the projected goli hits the goli
of the first player, the second player wins. If the height
from which the goli is projected is 19'6cm from the
ground and the goli is to be projected horizontally, with
what speed should it be projected so that it directly hits
the stationary goli without falling on the ground earlier ?

Figure (3-E8) shows a 11°7 ft wide ditch with the
approach roads at an angle of 15° with the horizontal.
With what minimum speed should a motorbike be
moving on the road so that it safely crosses the ditch ?

11.7 ft

15° 15°

Figure 3-E8

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

Assume that the length of the bike is 5 ft, and it leaves
the road when the front part runs out of the approach
road.

A person standing on the top of a cliff 171 ft high has
to throw a packet to his friend standing on the ground
228 ft horizontally away. If he throws the packet directly
aiming at the friend with a speed of 15:0 ft/s, how short
will the packet fall ?

A ball is projected from a point on the floor with a speed
of 15 m/s at an angle of 60° with the horizontal. Will it
hit a vertical wall 5 m away from the point of projection
and perpendicular to the plane of projection without
hitting the floor? Will the answer differ if the wall is
22 m away?

Find the average velocity of a projectile between the
instants it crosses half the maximum height. It is
projected with a speed uw at an angle 0 with the
horizontal.

A bomb is dropped from a plane flying horizontally with
uniform speed. Show that the bomb will explode
vertically below the plane. Is the statement true if the
plane flies with uniform speed but not horizontally ?

A boy standing on a long railroad car throws a ball
straight upwards. The car is moving on the horizontal
road with an acceleration of 1 m/s” and the projection
velocity in the vertical direction is 9°8 m/s. How far
behind the boy will the ball fall on the car?

A staircase contains three steps each 10 cm high and
20 cm wide (figure 3-E9). What should be the minimum
horizontal velocity of a ball rolling off the uppermost
plane so as to hit directly the lowest plane ?

Figure 3-E9

A person is standing on a truck moving with a constant
velocity of 14°7 m/s on a horizontal road. The man throws
a ball in such a way that it returns to the truck after
the truck has moved 58°8 m. Find the speed and the
angle of projection (a) as seen from the truck, (b) as seen
from the road.

The benches of a gallery in a cricket stadium are 1 m
wide and 1 m high. A batsman strikes the ball at a level
one metre above the ground and hits a mammoth sixer.
The ball starts at 35 m/s at an angle of 53° with the
horizontal. The benches are perpendicular to the plane
of motion and the first bench is 110 m from the batsman.
On which bench will the ball hit ?

A man is sitting on the shore of a river. He is in the
line of a 1:0 m long boat and is 5°5 m away from the
centre of the boat. He wishes to throw an apple into the
boat. If he can throw the apple only with a speed of 10
m/s, find the minimum and maximum angles of
projection for successful shot. Assume that the point of
