50

13.

Concepts of Physics

(a) due north (b) 30° east of north
(c) 30° north of west (d) 60° east of north.

In the arrangement shown in figure (3-Q3), the ends P
and Q of an inextensible string move downwards with
uniform speed uw. Pulleys A and B are fixed. The mass
M moves upwards with a speed

(a) 2u cosO (b) u/cosO (c) 2u/cos0 (d) ucos6é.

OBJECTIVE

. Consider the motion of the tip of the minute hand of a

clock. In one hour

(a) the displacement is zero
(b) the distance covered is zero
(c) the average speed is zero
(d) the average velocity is zero

. A particle moves along the X-axis as

x=u(t—2s)+a(t—2s)”.
(a) the initial velocity of the particle is u
(b) the acceleration of the particle is a
(c) the acceleration of the particle is 2a
(d) at t = 2 s particle is at the origin.

. Pick the correct statements :

(a) Average speed of a particle in a given time is never
less than the magnitude of the average velocity.

=>

du

dt #0

(b) It is possible to have a situation in which

d >
but 7, |v | =0.

(c) The average velocity of a particle is zero in a time
interval. It is possible that the instantaneous velocity is
never zero in the interval.

(d) The average velocity of a particle moving on a
straight line is zero in a time interval. It is possible that
the instantaneous velocity is never zero in the interval.
(Infinite accelerations are not allowed.)

. An object may have

(a) varying speed without having varying velocity
(b) varying velocity without having varying speed
(c) nonzero acceleration without having varying velocity
(d) nonzero acceleration without having varying speed.

. Mark the correct statements for a particle going on a

straight line :

(a) If the velocity and acceleration have opposite sign,
the object is slowing down.

(b) If the position and velocity have opposite sign, the
particle is moving towards the origin.

(c) If the velocity is zero at an instant, the acceleration
should also be zero at that instant.

(d) If the velocity is zero for a time interval, the
acceleration is zero at any instant within the time
interval.

Figure 3-Q3

II

. The velocity of a particle is zero at ¢t = 0.

(a) The acceleration at t = 0 must be zero.

(b) The acceleration at t = 0 may be zero.

(c) If the acceleration is zero from ¢ = 0 to ¢ = 10 s, the
speed is also zero in this interval.

(d) If the speed is zero from ¢ = 0 to ¢
acceleration is also zero in this interval.

10s the

- Mark the correct statements :

(a) The magnitude of the velocity of a particle is equal
to its speed.

(b) The magnitude of average velocity in an interval is
equal to its average speed in that interval.

(c) It is possible to have a situation in which the speed
of a particle is always zero but the average speed is not
zero.

(d) It is possible to have a situation in which the speed
of the particle is never zero but the average speed in an
interval is zero.

. The velocity-time plot for a particle moving on a straight

line is shown in the figure (3-Q4).

v (m/s)
10 NN
(@) 4 rn
10 20 30 ‘t(s)
—10+
Figure 3-Q4

(a) The particle has a constant acceleration.

(b) The particle has never turned around.

(c) The particle has zero displacement.

(d) The average speed in the interval 0 to 10s is the
same as the average speed in the interval 10s to 20s.

9. Figure (3-Q5) shows the position of a particle moving on

the X-axis as a function of time.

(a) The particle has come to rest 6 times.

(b) The maximum speed is at ¢ = 6s.

(c) The velocity remains positive for t = 0 tot = 6s.
(d) The average velocity for the total period shown is
negative.
