48

Concepts of Physics

of the particles moves with constant speed v. A always
has its velocity along AB, B along BC and C along CA.
At what time will the particles meet each other ?

Solution : The motion of the particles is roughly sketched

in figure (8-W15). By symmetry they will meet at the

Figure 3-W15

centroid O of the triangle. At any instant the particles
will form an equilateral triangle ABC with the same
centriod O. Concentrate on the motion of any one

particle, say A. At any instant its velocity makes angle
30° with AO.

The component of this velocity along AO is v cos30°. This
component is the rate of decrease of the distance AO.
Initially,

2
z 2_(d) _d |
40-3V" -(3| vB

Therefore, the time taken for AO to become zero

d/v3 __ 2d ad
~ vy. cos30° V3uxVv3 3u
Alternative : Velocity of A is v along AB. The velocity
of B is along BC. Its component along BA is v cos 60°
= v/2. Thus, the separation AB decreases at the rate

v 38v
v+—=—:

2 2

Since this rate is constant, the time taken in reducing
the separation AB from d to zero is

/_d 2d.
~ Bu Bu
2

QUESTIONS FOR SHORT ANSWER

. Galileo was punished by the Church for teaching that

the sun is stationary and the earth moves around it. His
opponents held the view that the earth is stationary and
the sun moves around it. If the absolute motion has no
meaning, are the two viewpoints not equally correct or
equally wrong ?

. When a particle moves with constant velocity, its

average velocity, its instantaneous velocity and its speed
are all equal. Comment on this statement.

. Acar travels at a speed of 60 km/hr due north and the

other at a speed of 60 km/hr due east. Are the velocities
equal ? If no, which one is greater ? If you find any of
the questions irrelevant, explain.

. A ball is thrown vertically upward with a speed of 20

m/s. Draw a graph showing the velocity of the ball as a
function of time as it goes up and then comes back.

The velocity of a particle is towards west at an instant.
Its acceleration is not towards west, not towards east,
not towards north and not towards south. Give an
example of this type of motion.

. At which point on its path a projectile has the smallest

speed ?

Two particles A and B start from rest and move for equal
time on a straight line. The particle A has an
acceleration a for the first half of the total time and 2a
for the second half. The particle B has an acceleration

10.

11.

2a for the first half and a for the second half. Which
particle has covered larger distance ?

If a particle is accelerating, it is either speeding up or
speeding down. Do you agree with this statement ?

. A food packet is dropped from a plane going at an

altitude of 100 m. What is the path of the packet as
seen from the plane ? What is the path as seen from the
ground ? If someone asks “what is the actual path”, what
will you answer ?

Give examples where (a) the velocity of a particle is zero
but its acceleration is not zero, (b) the velocity is opposite
in direction to the acceleration, (c) the velocity is
perpendicular to the acceleration.

Figure (3-Q1) shows the x coordinate of a particle as a
function of time. Find the signs of v, and a, at t = t,,

t=t, and t =t;.

t ty tg

Figure 3-Q1
