12.

13.

Rest and Motion : Kinematics 49

A player hits a baseball at some angle. The ball goes
high up in space. The player runs and catches the ball
before it hits the ground. Which of the two (the player
or the ball) has greater displacement ?

The increase in the speed of a car is proportional to the
additional petrol put into the engine. Is it possible to

14.

accelerate a car without putting more petrol or less
petrol into the engine ?

Rain is falling vertically. A man running on the road
keeps his umbrella tilted but a man standing on the
street keeps his umbrella vertical to protect himself from
the rain. But both of them keep their umbrella vertical
to avoid the vertical sun-rays. Explain.

OBJECTIVE I

. A motor car is going due north at a speed of 50 km/h.

It makes a 90° left turn without changing the speed.
The change in the velocity of the car is about

(a) 50 km/h towards west

(b) 70 km/h towards south-west

(c) 70 km/h towards north-west

(d) zero.

. Figure (3-Q2) shows the displacement-time graph of a

particle moving on the X-axis.

x

to t

Figure 3-Q2

(a) the particle is continuously going in positive x
direction

(b) the particle is at rest

(c) the velocity increases up to a time ¢,, and then
becomes constant

(d) the particle moves at a constant velocity up to a time
t,, and then stops.

. A particle has a velocity u towards east at t = 0. Its

acceleration is towards west and is constant. Let x, and
x, be the magnitude of displacements in the first 10
seconds and the next 10 seconds

(a) xX, < Xp (b) x, = Xp (c) X, > Xp

(d) the information is insufficient to decide the relation
of x, with x,.

. A person travelling on a straight line moves with a

uniform velocity v, for some time and with uniform
velocity v, for the next equal time. The average velocity
v is given by

(a) v= (b) v = Vode
@ 21,2 @ietel.
UU, Uz UU, Uz

. A person travelling on a straight line moves with a

uniform velocity v, for a distance x and with a uniform
velocity v, for the next equal distance. The average
velocity v is given by

10.

11.

12.

(a) v= “1 ; -2 (b) v =Vu,V,
2 1 1 1 1 1
(c) —=—+— (d) —-=—+—-
UU, Ds UU, Vy

A stone is released from an elevator going up with an
acceleration a. The acceleration of the stone after the
release is

(a) a upward

(c) (g -a) downward

A person standing near the edge of the top of a building
throws two balls A and B. The ball A is thrown vertically
upward and B is thrown vertically downward with the
same speed. The ball A hits the ground with a speed v,
and the ball B hits the ground with a speed v,. We have
(a) Uy > Up, (b) Va < Uz (C) Vg = Ve

(d) the relation between v, and v, depends on height of
the building above the ground.

(b) (g - a) upward
(d) g downward.

In a projectile motion the velocity

(a) is always perpendicular to the acceleration

(b) is never perpendicular to the acceleration

(c) is perpendicular to the acceleration for one instant
only

(d) is perpendicular to the acceleration for two instants.

Two bullets are fired simultaneously, horizontally and
with different speeds from the same place. Which bullet
will hit the ground first ?

(a) the faster one (b) the slower one

(c) both will reach simultaneously

(d) depends on the masses.

The range of a projectile fired at an angle of 15° is
50 m. If it is fired with the same speed at an angle of
45°, its range will be

(a) 25m (b) 37m (c) 50m (d) 100 m.

Two projectiles A and B are projected with angle of
projection 15° for the projectile A and 45° for the
projectile B. If R, and R, be the horizontal range for the
two projectiles, then

(a) R, < R, (b) R, = R, (c) R, > Rz

(d) the information is insufficient to decide the relation
of R, with R,.

A river is flowing from west to east at a speed of 5
metres per minute. A man on the south bank of the
river, capable of swimming at 10 metres per minute in
still water, wants to swim across the river in the shortest
time. He should swim in a direction
