CHAPTER 3

REST AND MOTION :

KINEMATICS

3.1 REST AND MOTION

When do we say that a body is at rest and when
do we say that it is in motion ? You may say that if a
body does not change its position as time passes it is
at rest. If a body changes its position with time, it is
said to be moving. But when do we say that it is not
changing its position? A book placed on the table
remains on the table and we say that the book is at
rest. However, if we station ourselves on the moon (the
Appollo missions have made it possible), the whole
earth is found to be changing its position and so the
room, the table and the book are all continuously
changing their positions. The book is at rest if it is
viewed from the room, it is moving if it is viewed from
the moon.

Motion is a combined property of the object under
study and the observer. There is no meaning of rest
or motion without the viewer. Nothing is in absolute
rest or in absolute motion. The moon is moving with
respect to the book and the book moves with respect
to the moon. Take another example. A robber enters
a train moving at great speed with respect to the
ground, brings out his pistol and says “Don’t move,
stand still”. The passengers stand still. The passengers
are at rest with respect to the robber but are moving
with respect to the rail track.

Ieee Ie

OO} OO)

Figure 3.1

To locate the position of a particle we need a frame
of reference. A convenient way to fix up the frame of
reference is to choose three mutually perpendicular
axes and name them X-Y-Z axes. The coordinates, (x,
y, Z) of the particle then specify the position of the

particle with respect to that frame. Add a clock into
the frame of reference to measure the time. If all the
three coordinates x, y and z of the particle remain
unchanged as time passes, we say that the particle is
at rest with respect to this frame. If any one or more
coordinates change with time, we say that the body is
moving with respect to this frame.

There is no rule or restriction on the choice of a
frame. We can choose a frame of reference according
to our convenience to describe the situation under
study. Thus, when we are in a train it is convenient
to choose a frame attached to our compartment. The
coordinates of a suitcase placed on the upper berth do
not change with time (unless the train gives a jerk)
and we say that the suitcase is at rest in the train-
frame. The different stations, electric poles, trees etc.
change their coordinates and we say that they are
moving in the train-frame. Thus, we say that “Bombay
is coming” and “Pune has already passed”.

In the following sections we shall assume that the
frame of reference is already chosen and we are
describing the motion of the objects in the chosen
frame. Sometimes the choice of the frame is clear from
the context and we do not mention it. Thus, when one
says the car is travelling and the rickshaw is not, it
is clear that all positions are measured from a frame
attached to the road.

3.2 DISTANCE AND DISPLACEMENT

Suppose a particle is at A at time ¢, and at B at
time t, with respect to a given frame (figure 3.2).

Figure 3.2
